# Flask React Postgres and Docker... on Heroku

I assume if you're here, there's a good chance you tried the same google search term I used. Unfortunately, I couldn't find any single one that seemed to put it all together. Docker is quickly becoming the de facto way of running programs since it reduces what could be a long bullet list of instructions in a README, with various troubleshooting along the way, to pretty much a single command with some optional configuration. Ultimately, it was a technology I really wanted to learn more about with this project. React has also been an invaluable tool for frontend development. I thought it would simple combining it with a Flask app but it wasn't quite as straightforward as I expected. While I still have much to learn about all of these technologies, I figured I'd put together a quick guide on how I use them together in both development and production environments, especially with dockerizing and deploying to Heroku.

I'm going to break this article up into four main sections:

-   A basic flask and react app (includes local + production environments)
-   Using flask with postgres
-   Dockerizing it all
-   Deploying to Heroku

## Project Structure

Here is the complete project structure to boot:

```
    Dockerfile
    uwsgi.ini
    config.ini
    requirements.txt
    src/        # This is the flask app
        index.py
        manage.py
        svc/
            __init__.py
        model/
            __init__.py
            db.py
        util/
            __init__.py
    ui/           # This is the react app
        public/
            index.html
            assets/        # All images go in here
        src/
            index.js
            App.js
            api/
                base.js
            pages/
                Landing.js
```

`Dockerfile` will be used to build your project and create a single docker image that will be used for deployment.

`uwsgi.ini` is a config file that is for running a uWSGI server. The Flask server is not meant for production but fortunately, it is very simple to use a config and run your app with uWSGI instead.

`config.ini` another config file, but for generic properties used by your Flask app. I currently have my database URI and logging levels set inside.

`Src` manages the flask app and its modules. Inside, you have the svc, or service, module. Model handles the database structure. Util is also a nice-to-have for recurring site-wide functions such as managing your config (config.ini) and a session factory (handles database transactions).

`UI` is your react app, created with create-react-app. This is an extremely simple structure and if you are looking to learn more, I'd advise finding a react specific tutorial.

## Flask with React

For an in depth guide on flask development, I would highly suggest reading this article: [The Flask Mega-Tutorial Part I: Hello, World!](https://blog.miguelgrinberg.com/post/the-flask-mega-tutorial-part-i-hello-world)

Your src/index.py will look like:

```
    from svc import app
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        port = os.environ.get('PORT', 5000)
        app.run(port=port)
```

The Flask App is configured in the svc module, imported, and started here. It's the entry into your flask application and I like to keep it extremely simple.

Getting port from the environment is important when we get to deployment. It will default to 5000 (or whatever port you want to use.) I ended up using 5000 for production as well but when you have multiple apps running on the same web server, it's good practice to be flexbile.

and src/svc/\_\_init\_\_.py:

```
    from flask import Flask, send_from_directory
    from flask_cors import CORS

    # create the flask app
    app = Flask(__name__, static_folder='/app/ui', static_url_path='/')

    # necessary to run this
    # adds protection against cross site scripting attacks
    CORS(app)


    """
    Import module API routes
    """
    from my_module.api import my_module_init_routes
    my_module_init_routes(app)


    """
    Offer React pages
    """
    @app.route('/', defaults={'path': ''})
    @app.route('/<path:path>')
    @app.errorhandler(404)
    def index(path):
        return send_from_directory(app.static_folder, 'index.html')
```

The Flask app object is created in the svc module.

The static_folder param used to intialize the Flask app specifies where you will have your compiled react app in the final docker container

I like to have routes separated based on module and import them here but this is just personal preference and I haven't seen it widely done this way. You can also just create API routes in the same file.

The route at the bottom is specifically for serving the react app. The `errorhandler(404)` route was added to solve an issue I ran into where my path was not matching the generic route `'/<path:path>'` which many stack overflow examples use. It may have something to do with the way react router works. I was able to get the index.html from going to the root of the web app, and even navigate with react router links, but if I tried to access a page directly, it would return a 404. I delegate the 404 error handling to the react web app, so it's ok to catch the 404 at this level.

If you are running flask and react servers locally, you will never actually hit the this route. Say flask is running on port 5000, and react is running on port 3000. You would access the react app on port 3000 and allow your react app to make api calls to your flask app for you. That is where the API routes come in.

> Tip: Python modules and importing
>
> You may have noticed I created the Flask object in the `__init__.py` file. This means that it can be imported directly from the module: `from svc import app`. If it was in it's own file, such as `src/svc/app.py` then you would go another level deeper: `from svc.app import app`. The rule of thumb is that any objects in the `__init__.py` file of a module are on the same level as other sub modules, or files within the module.

React is extremely powerful when it comes to creating your UI. It was really night and day when I came from working with individual templates to using interchangeable components that allow you to build the UI rapidly.
basic react app...

> Tip: React assets
> ...

axios...
local and prod URI...

run flask and react to test...

build react and serve with flask...

##Flask with Postgres
Database (dev and prod)
FlaskSQLAlchemy
alembic
manage.py
db init
db upgrade
point to db in config.ini
Tip: decision on config, session, and flask sqlalchemy
you need a migrations folder
Tip: ENUMs

## Dockerize your App

Dockerfile
Docker compose

## Deploy to Heroku

Once the app is fully dockerized, you are ready to deploy to Heroku. At this stage, it is fairly straightforward but I encountered a few hang ups.

First, you will need to install the heroku CLI

https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/container-registry-and-runtime

https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/build-docker-images-heroku-yml

## Closing notes

I began this project in order to have a more complete understanding of creating and deploying a full-blown flask application with a react front end. I modeled the structure after what I had seen done at various companies I've worked for and as I began trying it for myself, incorporated changes from stack overflow as well.

I had spent a good amount of time working with getting nginx into my project as well, as a reverse proxy, but when it came time to deploy to Heroku, I ran into so many issues I ended up scrapping it and settling on just uWSGI (it's common to see them used together.)

My main goal of this article is to hopefully help someone who ran into one of the many issues I ran into as I began the process of deploying my app. Creating the Flask app was simple, then it took some more time to get React to work with it, but once it was, I was cruising, getting my app together. It's amazing that I still horribly underestimate the time it will take me to complete a step of a project like this. Once I had the app built, I thought I could get it hosted in a few hours. It took weeks (wasn't going full steam the whole time.) So yeah... I hope if you got to this point, you either found an interesting take away, or found the solution to whatever it is you just googled.

```

```
